docs/tutorials/Bonding_and_Charge/mulliken_population.md, before:


By default castep will calculate the Mulliken Population analysis at the end of every calculation (the keyword `popn_calculate` is set to `true` by default).

## Silicon

Here is a cell file. You can use the icon in the top right of the box to copy and paste the text. Save it in a file `silicon.cell`

```
%block lattice_abc
3.8 3.8 3.8
60 60 60
%endblock lattice_abc
!
! Atomic co-ordinates for each species.
! These are in fractional co-ordinates wrt to the cell.
!
%block positions_frac
Si 0.00 0.00 0.00
Si 0.25 0.25 0.25
%endblock positions_frac
!
! Analyse structure to determine symmetry
!
symmetry_generate
!
! Specify M-P grid dimensions for electron wavevectors (K-points)
!
kpoint_mp_grid 4 4 4

```

Here is a param file. You can use the icon in the top right of the box to copy and paste the text. Save it in a file `silicon.param`

```
xc_functional : LDA
cutoff_energy : 500 eV
spin_polarised : false
```

Run castep. Toward the end of the file `silicon.castep` you will find


```
Atomic Populations (Mulliken)
-----------------------------
Species          Ion     s       p       d       f      Total   Charge (e)
==========================================================================
Si              1     1.356   2.644   0.000   0.000   4.000     0.000
Si              2     1.356   2.644   0.000   0.000   4.000     0.000
==========================================================================

            Bond                   Population      Length (A)
======================================================================
         Si 1 -- Si 2                   2.99        2.32702
======================================================================
```
The atoms are not charged overall, and there is a large bond population. This is all indicative of a strong covalent bond.

### Comparing to Other Diamond Structures

To understand the results of this further, we will compare the results of this to 2 other diamond structures - GaAs and diamond (as in carbon-diamond).

For both of the cases, we will use an identical .param file (just rename them to ```diamond.param``` and ```GaAs.param```). The cell files will be slightly different - for diamond we will change the ```lattice_abc``` block lattice dimensions with 2.52 (rather than 3.8 - the structure is the same but the cell size is different). Naturally the ```Si```'s in the ```positions_frac``` block need to be replaced with ```C```'s

Similarly, towards the end of ```diamond.castep``` we find

```
Atomic Populations (Mulliken)
-----------------------------
Species          Ion     s       p       d       f      Total   Charge (e)
==========================================================================
C               1     1.076   2.924   0.000   0.000   4.000     0.000
C               2     1.076   2.924   0.000   0.000   4.000     0.000
==========================================================================

            Bond                   Population      Length (A)
======================================================================
          C 1 -- C 2                    3.00        1.54318
======================================================================
```
The results are rather similar but there are some interesting things to note:

- The ratio of the populations in s and p orbitals is closer to 1:3, which is expected for sp^3^ hybridization - this indicates that the bonds are much more perfectly hybridized, meaning it's more overlapped: this indicates stronger bonding, as well as showing that silicon is a semimetal
- The population of electrons in the bonds is the same (indicating that the same type of bonding is present), but the bond length is smaller - again indicating more overlap and thus stronger bonding.
- The charge on the atoms is 0 for both of them - this is expected given that it's 2 identical atoms.

Now we will compare it with GaAs. The same procedure is used, except the lattice length is now 3.93 and the atoms in ```positions_frac``` with Ga and As (it doesn't matter which one goes in which position/line).

We get an output looking like this:

```
Atomic Populations (Mulliken)
-----------------------------
Species          Ion     s       p       d       f      Total   Charge (e)
==========================================================================
Ga              1     1.180   1.743   9.994   0.000  12.917     0.083
As              1     1.488   3.595  10.000   0.000  15.083    -0.083
==========================================================================

            Bond                   Population      Length (A)
======================================================================
         Ga 1 -- As 1                   0.34        2.44652
======================================================================
```

Despite having the same structure, the results are very different now -

- Unlike before, the Ga and As ions have charges on them - this is indicative of ionic/polar character
- There is now a much smaller population in the Ga-As bond. This indicates that the covalent bonds between them aren't particularly strong.
- Especially in the case of Ga, the s:p ratio is far off from 3 - this again indicates that the bonding is not like in the cases above

## Diatomic cases

Next we will examine diatomic molecules - HF, HCl and HBr. We will examine the results given what we know about how electronegativity varies across the periodic table.

Here is the ```HF.cell``` file

```
%block lattice_abc
5 5 5
90 90 90
%endblock lattice_abc

%block positions_abs
H 2 2 2
F 2.91 2 2
%endblock positions_abs
```

Since we are just trying to look at a single diatomic molecule, the cell is defined rather simply - an arbitrarily large cube for the cell (making it too large would make the calculation take longer, but too small and it won't be accurate), 1 atom placed about in the middle, and the 2^nd^ atom placed a bond length away from it. The bond lengths can be found on a [database](https://cccbdb.nist.gov/), or you may perform a [geometry optimisation](../../..//documentation/Geometry_Optimisation/overview) to find it yourself if you wish.

Using a ```param``` file identical to before and running castep yields this towards the end of ```HF.castep```

```
Atomic Populations (Mulliken)
-----------------------------
Species          Ion     s       p       d       f      Total   Charge (e)
==========================================================================
H               1     0.309   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.309     0.691
F               1     1.960   5.731   0.000   0.000   7.691    -0.691
==========================================================================

            Bond                   Population      Length (A)
======================================================================
          H 1 -- F 1                    0.34        0.91000
======================================================================
```
There are some interesting things to note:

- Like GaAs (and unlike Si and diamond), there are 2 opposite charges on both atoms. However, the charge is significantly larger, indicating that the molecule is highly polar/ionic.
- The population of the H-F bond is rather low - this indicates that the molecule has little covalent character

We will now compare to very similar molecules - HCl and HBr - keeping the trend of hydrogen bonded to a group 7 element. The ```param``` files are completely identical and in the ```cell``` files the bond lengths used are 1.275 for HCl and 1.44 for HBr.

HCl has the result

```
Species          Ion     s       p       d       f      Total   Charge (e)
==========================================================================
  H               1     0.620   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.620     0.380
  Cl              1     1.936   5.443   0.000   0.000   7.379    -0.379
==========================================================================

                 Bond                   Population      Length (A)
======================================================================
               H 1 -- Cl 1                   0.56        1.27500
======================================================================
```

While HBr has

```
Atomic Populations (Mulliken)
-----------------------------
Species          Ion     s       p       d       f      Total   Charge (e)
==========================================================================
H               1     0.824   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.824     0.176
Br              1     1.908   5.267   0.000   0.000   7.176    -0.176
==========================================================================

            Bond                   Population      Length (A)
======================================================================
          H 1 -- Br 1                   0.53        1.44000
======================================================================
```
The most significant thing this shows us is that the charges on both atoms decrease as you go down group 7. This successfully demonstrates something we already know: as you go down group 7, the electronegativity decreases. The same principle can be applied to estimate relative electronegativities of different atoms.

Commit message:

Reworded some things + general clean-up

docs/tutorials/Bonding_and_Charge/mulliken_population.md, after:


By default castep will calculate the Mulliken Population analysis at the end of every calculation (the keyword `popn_calculate` is set to `true` by default).

## Silicon

Here is a cell file. You can use the icon in the top right of the box to copy and paste the text. Save it in a file `silicon.cell`

```
%block lattice_abc
3.8 3.8 3.8
60 60 60
%endblock lattice_abc
!
! Atomic co-ordinates for each species.
! These are in fractional co-ordinates wrt to the cell.
!
%block positions_frac
Si 0.00 0.00 0.00
Si 0.25 0.25 0.25
%endblock positions_frac
!
! Analyse structure to determine symmetry
!
symmetry_generate
!
! Specify M-P grid dimensions for electron wavevectors (K-points)
!
kpoint_mp_grid 4 4 4

```

Here is a param file. You can use the icon in the top right of the box to copy and paste the text. Save it in a file `silicon.param`

```
xc_functional : LDA
cutoff_energy : 500 eV
spin_polarised : false
```

Run castep. Toward the end of the file `silicon.castep` you will find


```
Atomic Populations (Mulliken)
-----------------------------
Species          Ion     s       p       d       f      Total   Charge (e)
==========================================================================
Si              1     1.356   2.644   0.000   0.000   4.000     0.000
Si              2     1.356   2.644   0.000   0.000   4.000     0.000
==========================================================================

            Bond                   Population      Length (A)
======================================================================
         Si 1 -- Si 2                   2.99        2.32702
======================================================================
```
The atoms are not charged overall, and there is a large bond population. This is all indicative of a strong covalent bond.

### Comparing to Other Diamond Structures

To understand the results of this further, we will compare them to 2 other diamond structures - GaAs and diamond (as in carbon-diamond).

For both of these cases, we will use an identical ```.param``` file (just rename them to ```diamond.param``` and ```GaAs.param```). The cell files will be slightly different - for diamond we will change the ```lattice_abc``` block lattice dimensions with 2.52 (rather than 3.8 - the structure is the same but the cell size is different). Naturally the ```Si```'s in the ```positions_frac``` block need to be replaced with ```C```'s

Towards the end of ```diamond.castep``` we find

```
Atomic Populations (Mulliken)
-----------------------------
Species          Ion     s       p       d       f      Total   Charge (e)
==========================================================================
C               1     1.076   2.924   0.000   0.000   4.000     0.000
C               2     1.076   2.924   0.000   0.000   4.000     0.000
==========================================================================

            Bond                   Population      Length (A)
======================================================================
          C 1 -- C 2                    3.00        1.54318
======================================================================
```
The results are rather similar but there are a couple of interesting things to note:

- The ratio of the populations in s and p orbitals is closer to 1:3, which is expected for sp^3^ hybridization - this indicates that the bonds are much more perfectly hybridized, meaning it's more overlapped: this indicates stronger bonding, as well as showing that silicon is a semimetal
- The population of electrons in the bonds is the same (indicating that the same type of bonding is present), but the bond length is smaller - again indicating more overlap and thus stronger bonding.

Now we will compare it with GaAs. The same procedure is used, except the lattice length is now 3.93 and the atoms in ```positions_frac``` should be ```Ga``` and ```As``` (it doesn't matter which one goes in which position/line).

We get an output looking like this:

```
Atomic Populations (Mulliken)
-----------------------------
Species          Ion     s       p       d       f      Total   Charge (e)
==========================================================================
Ga              1     1.180   1.743   9.994   0.000  12.917     0.083
As              1     1.488   3.595  10.000   0.000  15.083    -0.083
==========================================================================

            Bond                   Population      Length (A)
======================================================================
         Ga 1 -- As 1                   0.34        2.44652
======================================================================
```

Despite having the same structure, the results are very different now:

- Unlike before, the Ga and As ions have charges on them - this is indicative of ionic/polar character
- There is now a much smaller population in the Ga-As bond. This indicates less covalent character
- Especially in the case of Ga, the s:p shell ratio is far off from 1:3 - this again indicates that the bonding is not like in the cases above

## Diatomic molecules

Next we will examine a few diatomic molecules - HF, HCl and HBr.

Here is the ```HF.cell``` file

```
%block lattice_abc
5 5 5
90 90 90
%endblock lattice_abc

%block positions_abs
H 2 2 2
F 2.91 2 2
%endblock positions_abs
```

Since we are just trying to look at a single diatomic molecule, the cell is defined rather simply - an arbitrarily large cube for the cell (making it too large would make the calculation take longer, but make it too small and it won't be accurate), 1 atom placed about in the middle, and the 2^nd^ atom placed a bond length away from it - in this case F is $0.91 \mathring{A}$ to the right of the H . The bond lengths can be found on a [database](https://cccbdb.nist.gov/), or you may perform a [geometry optimisation](../../..//documentation/Geometry_Optimisation/overview) to find it yourself if you wish.

Using a ```param``` file identical to before and running castep yields this towards the end of ```HF.castep```

```
Atomic Populations (Mulliken)
-----------------------------
Species          Ion     s       p       d       f      Total   Charge (e)
==========================================================================
H               1     0.309   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.309     0.691
F               1     1.960   5.731   0.000   0.000   7.691    -0.691
==========================================================================

            Bond                   Population      Length (A)
======================================================================
          H 1 -- F 1                    0.34        0.91000
======================================================================
```
There are a couple of interesting things to note:

- Like GaAs (and unlike Si and diamond), there are 2 opposite charges on both atoms. However, the charge is significantly larger, indicating that the molecule is highly polar/ionic.
- The population of the H-F bond is rather low - this indicates that the molecule has little covalent character

We will now compare HF to very similar molecules - HCl and HBr - keeping the trend of hydrogen bonded to a group 7 element. The ```param``` files are completely identical and in the ```cell``` files the bond lengths used are 1.275 for HCl and 1.44 for HBr.

HCl has the result

```
Species          Ion     s       p       d       f      Total   Charge (e)
==========================================================================
  H               1     0.620   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.620     0.380
  Cl              1     1.936   5.443   0.000   0.000   7.379    -0.379
==========================================================================

                 Bond                   Population      Length (A)
======================================================================
               H 1 -- Cl 1                   0.56        1.27500
======================================================================
```

While HBr has

```
Atomic Populations (Mulliken)
-----------------------------
Species          Ion     s       p       d       f      Total   Charge (e)
==========================================================================
H               1     0.824   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.824     0.176
Br              1     1.908   5.267   0.000   0.000   7.176    -0.176
==========================================================================

            Bond                   Population      Length (A)
======================================================================
          H 1 -- Br 1                   0.53        1.44000
======================================================================
```
The most significant thing this shows us is that the charges on both atoms decrease as you go down group 7. This successfully demonstrates something we already know: as you go down group 7, the electronegativity decreases. The same principle can be applied to estimate relative electronegativities of different atoms.
